.. _whatsnew_110:

What's new in 1.1.0 (TBD)
---------------------------

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.. _whatsnew_110.bug_fixes:

Bug fixes
~~~~~~~~~

ML models
^^^^^^^^^
- Fixed :func:`extract_group_features` using ``"+"`` / ``"-"`` to count strands while
  the pipeline stores them as ``"forward"`` / ``"reverse"`` (:issue:`97`).  The two
  LightGBM features ``strand_plus_frac`` and ``strand_minus_frac`` were silently
  always 0.0, wasting 2 of the 31 feature slots.  After the fix both features are
  correct (always 0.0 or 1.0 since every ORF group shares one stop codon and
  therefore one strand).
.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.. _whatsnew_110.enhancements:

Enhancements
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Benchmarking
^^^^^^^^^^^^
- Expanded ``TEST_GENOMES`` from 15 to 43 genomes (:issue:`101`) to give ≥ 10
  genomes per taxonomic group — the minimum required for statistically
  meaningful per-group validation with :func:`validate_batch`.
  Group counts after expansion: Proteobacteria 12, Firmicutes 10,
  Actinobacteria 10, Archaea 11 (total 43, up from 15).
  New genomes were selected for phylogenetic diversity within each group
  (e.g. Actinobacteria now includes *Streptomyces*, *Frankia*,
  *Actinoplanes* alongside the original *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*).
  A new test asserts each group has n ≥ 10.
Evaluation
^^^^^^^^^^
- Added :func:`validate_batch` to ``src/validation.py`` (:issue:`104`).  Runs
  validation across a list of genome accessions, groups results by taxonomic
  group (using ``GENOME_CATALOG``), and prints a per-group sensitivity /
  precision / F1 table.  Groups that fall more than 5 percentage points below
  the overall F1 are flagged automatically.  Accepts the same
  ``start_tolerance`` / ``stop_tolerance`` parameters as
  :func:`compare_orfs_to_reference`.
- Added ``start_tolerance`` and ``stop_tolerance`` parameters to
  :func:`compare_orfs_to_reference` (:issue:`99`).  Setting
  ``start_tolerance=100`` enables biologically realistic evaluation: prokaryotic
  start sites are uncertain by up to a few codons due to SD-signal ambiguity and
  alternative start codons.  Default remains 0 (exact match) for backward
  compatibility.  The result dict now also carries ``match_mode``,
  ``start_tolerance``, and ``stop_tolerance`` for full reproducibility.

ML (continued)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
- Retrained :class:`HybridGeneFilter` (CNN+Dense) on output of the new LGB model
  (:issue:`112`).  Training data now flows through the correct cascade (LGB filter
  → ``select_best_starts`` → second filter), so the model learns the distribution
  it actually sees at inference.  Validated on 20 held-out genomes not in
  ``GENOME_CATALOG``: +4.24 pp mean F1, +3.65 pp sensitivity, +2.74 pp precision;
  19/20 genomes improved, 0 regressions above 0.05 pp.  Largest gains in
  Actinobacteria (+9.99 pp F1, +11.34 pp sensitivity).
- Lowered ``HybridGeneFilter`` default threshold from 0.12 to **0.25**, selected
  by end-to-end gene-prediction F1 sweep across 8 holdout genomes.
- Added ``HybridGeneFilter.train()``, ``HybridGeneFilter.save()``, and
  ``HybridGeneFilter.calibrate_threshold()`` (:issue:`112`).  Supports
  ``BCEWithLogitsLoss(pos_weight=...)`` and optional focal loss.  Training uses
  per-batch sequence encoding (no pre-allocation) with a 1500 bp sequence cap.
- Added :meth:`HybridGeneFilter._one_hot_encode_dna` vectorised via numpy ASCII
  lookup table — replaces the per-nucleotide Python loop (~100x faster).

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.. _whatsnew_110.performance:

Performance improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.. _whatsnew_110.contributors:

Contributors
~~~~~~~~~~~~
- roeimed0
